membership.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: Become a member
sidebar_link: false
---

![Faunal_bone](/assets/images/banners/faunal_bone.png)

## Benefits of membership

ISBA sponsors a wide range of initiatives to support biomolecular archaeology, including a biennial ISBA meeting, student poster and presentation prizes, article awards, and workshop micro-grants. ISBA membership helps to fund these initiatives and to support the maintenance of our website, listserv, and social media accounts.

Members also get access to a "Members Only" event at the biennial International Symposium for Biomolecular Archaeology. Membership entitles you to stand for a position on our Board of Trustees, and vote for new Board members. Members are able to nominate their institution to be the host of future biennial International Symposium for Biomolecular Archaeology conference events.

Membership is not required for ISBA symposium registration, however members will receive a discount upon registration.

Membership fees are described in the table below.

| Type     | Cost | Duration |
| -------- | ---- | -------- |
| Student  | £15  | 2 years  |
| Standard | £30  | 2 years  |

## Steps to Membership

Registration can be performed in two to three steps:

1. Make membership fee payment
2. Register your details
3. [Students only] Send proof of student status

<p style="color: #348aee">⚠️ <b>Membership is only considered valid once step two has been completed!</b></p>

## 1. Make membership fee payment

Follow these buttons to pay by PayPal. PayPal should allow you to pay directly through your PayPal account, or by credit or debit card (also without an account for some countries). <i>This is our preferred method of payment and will expedite your membership order.</i>

If this is not available in your region, please see below for information how to pay via bank transfer.

In both cases, please note down your PayPal transaction ID or Bank Transfer reference or transaction ID, as you will need this for the second step.

### Via Paypal

To pay for membership via PayPal please select the corresponding membership type from the drop down menu below, and press the **Pay Now** button to enter your payment details with PayPal.

If you wish to sign up for ISBA membership with an email other than your paypal account (e.g. institutional account), please put your preferred email address in the SELLER INSTRUCTIONS section!

<form action="https://www.paypal.com/cgi-bin/webscr" method="post" target="_top">
<input type="hidden" name="cmd" value="_s-xclick">
<input type="hidden" name="hosted_button_id" value="K68R8DFG9JF7G">
<table>
<tr><td><input type="hidden" name="on0" value="Membership Types">Membership Types</td></tr><tr><td><select name="os0">
<option value="Student">Student £15.00 GBP</option>
<option value="Non-Student">Non-Student £30.00 GBP</option>
</select> </td></tr>
</table>
<input type="hidden" name="currency_code" value="GBP">
<input type="image" src="https://www.paypalobjects.com/en_US/GB/i/btn/btn_buynowCC_LG.gif" border="0" name="submit" alt="PayPal – The safer, easier way to pay online!">
<img alt="" border="0" src="https://www.paypalobjects.com/en_GB/i/scr/pixel.gif" width="1" height="1">
</form>

<details>
<div style="border-style: none none none solid;border-left-color:#4895ef;border-left-width=10px;padding:20px">
	<summary>Click here on how to pay via PayPal without PayPal account!</summary>
<p>Some countries allow you to pay without a PayPal account.</p>
<p>If so, after pressing the 'Buy now' button above, you should see a menu like this</p>
<img src="/assets/images/membership/payal-uk_de-page.png" style="display: block;margin-left: auto;margin-right: auto;width: 50%;">
<p>Here you can simply press the 'pay with credit or debit card' or 'continue without a guest account' button.</p>
<p>If you <b>do not</b> see such a button, we are currently working on other options for paying for membership. Please watch the ISBA social media/mailing list for updates.</p>
</div>
</details>

## Via other methods

If you do not have a PayPal account please see the details in the collapsed sections below.

<details>
	<summary>Click here on how to paying via bank transfer</summary>
<div style="border-style: none none none solid;border-left-color:#4895ef;border-left-width=10px;padding:20px">
<p>If it is not possible to pay via PayPal in your region (with or without an PayPal account), please pay your membership fee by International Bank Transfer to the ISBA Treasurer.</p>
<p>Please note, International Bank Transfer can take up to 5 working days.</p>
<ul>
<li><b>Name (Beneficiary)</b>: ISBA</li>
<li><b>IBAN</b>: GB26CAFB40524000037289</li>
<li><b>Sort code</b>: 40-52-40</li>
<li><b>Account number</b>: 00037289</li>
<li><b>Receiving Bank Details</b>:
CAF Bank Limited,
25 Kings Hill Avenue,
Kings Hill,
West Malling,
Kent ME19 4JQ
</li>
</ul>
<p>Make sure to note the transaction ID, as this will be required for registration.</p>
</div>
</details>

<br>

For any other enquiries please contact the webmaster and secretary via: [webmaster@isbarch.org](mailto:webmaster@isbarch.org).

## 2. Register

Once the payment has been made, use the button below to use the Google Form to register your details:

<button onclick="window.open('https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLScSP0j1FPUZ2xN-IKjygf-IyqTi6gLB6-HQZ5wM95W4N3RfYQ/viewform?usp=sf_link')" class="button-join">Register</button>

> ⚠️ Your membership will only be considered valid once your payment has been sent!

## 3. (Students only) Send proof of student status

If you register with a student membership, please send proof of your enrollment status (e.g., photo of student ID, letter from supervisor, institutional certificate, etc.) to the [treasurer@isbarch.org](mailto:treasurer@isbarch.org), with [secretary@isbarch.org](mailto:secretary@isbarch.org) in cc.

Your membership will only be valid once the treasurer receives this proof of student status.

## 4. Confirmation

You should automatically receive an email with a confirmation number after registering (step 2). If you do not receive this email, please contact the webmaster. The membership will be valid for two years.

If you have an issues or questions, please contact the treasurer or secretary via: treasurer via: [webmaster@isbarch.org](mailto:treasurer@isbarch.org) or [secretary@isbarch.org](mailto:secretary@isbarch.org).

Commit message:

Transition role added to student status

membership.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: Become a member
sidebar_link: false
---

![Faunal_bone](/assets/images/banners/faunal_bone.png)

## Benefits of membership

ISBA sponsors a wide range of initiatives to support biomolecular archaeology, including a biennial ISBA meeting, student poster and presentation prizes, article awards, and workshop micro-grants. ISBA membership helps to fund these initiatives and to support the maintenance of our website, listserv, and social media accounts.

Members also get access to a "Members Only" event at the biennial International Symposium for Biomolecular Archaeology. Membership entitles you to stand for a position on our Board of Trustees, and vote for new Board members. Members are able to nominate their institution to be the host of future biennial International Symposium for Biomolecular Archaeology conference events.

Membership is not required for ISBA symposium registration, however members will receive a discount upon registration.

Membership fees are described in the table below.

| Type     | Cost | Duration |
| -------- | ---- | -------- |
| Student  | £15  | 2 years  |
| Standard | £30  | 2 years  |

Student status applies to individuals actively pursuing higher education who have not yet defended their PhD. This includes enrolled undergraduate, Masters, and PhD students, as well as students who are in transition roles between these steps. We define a transition role as being within 2 years of completing an undergraduate or Masters degree.

## Steps to Membership

Registration can be performed in two to three steps:

1. Make membership fee payment
2. Register your details
3. [Students only] Send proof of student status

<p style="color: #348aee">⚠️ <b>Membership is only considered valid once step two has been completed!</b></p>

## 1. Make membership fee payment

Follow these buttons to pay by PayPal. PayPal should allow you to pay directly through your PayPal account, or by credit or debit card (also without an account for some countries). <i>This is our preferred method of payment and will expedite your membership order.</i>

If this is not available in your region, please see below for information how to pay via bank transfer.

In both cases, please note down your PayPal transaction ID or Bank Transfer reference or transaction ID, as you will need this for the second step.

### Via Paypal

To pay for membership via PayPal please select the corresponding membership type from the drop down menu below, and press the **Pay Now** button to enter your payment details with PayPal.

If you wish to sign up for ISBA membership with an email other than your paypal account (e.g. institutional account), please put your preferred email address in the SELLER INSTRUCTIONS section!

<form action="https://www.paypal.com/cgi-bin/webscr" method="post" target="_top">
<input type="hidden" name="cmd" value="_s-xclick">
<input type="hidden" name="hosted_button_id" value="K68R8DFG9JF7G">
<table>
<tr><td><input type="hidden" name="on0" value="Membership Types">Membership Types</td></tr><tr><td><select name="os0">
<option value="Student">Student £15.00 GBP</option>
<option value="Non-Student">Non-Student £30.00 GBP</option>
</select> </td></tr>
</table>
<input type="hidden" name="currency_code" value="GBP">
<input type="image" src="https://www.paypalobjects.com/en_US/GB/i/btn/btn_buynowCC_LG.gif" border="0" name="submit" alt="PayPal – The safer, easier way to pay online!">
<img alt="" border="0" src="https://www.paypalobjects.com/en_GB/i/scr/pixel.gif" width="1" height="1">
</form>

<details>
<div style="border-style: none none none solid;border-left-color:#4895ef;border-left-width=10px;padding:20px">
	<summary>Click here on how to pay via PayPal without PayPal account!</summary>
<p>Some countries allow you to pay without a PayPal account.</p>
<p>If so, after pressing the 'Buy now' button above, you should see a menu like this</p>
<img src="/assets/images/membership/payal-uk_de-page.png" style="display: block;margin-left: auto;margin-right: auto;width: 50%;">
<p>Here you can simply press the 'pay with credit or debit card' or 'continue without a guest account' button.</p>
<p>If you <b>do not</b> see such a button, we are currently working on other options for paying for membership. Please watch the ISBA social media/mailing list for updates.</p>
</div>
</details>

## Via other methods

If you do not have a PayPal account please see the details in the collapsed sections below.

<details>
	<summary>Click here on how to paying via bank transfer</summary>
<div style="border-style: none none none solid;border-left-color:#4895ef;border-left-width=10px;padding:20px">
<p>If it is not possible to pay via PayPal in your region (with or without an PayPal account), please pay your membership fee by International Bank Transfer to the ISBA Treasurer.</p>
<p>Please note, International Bank Transfer can take up to 5 working days.</p>
<ul>
<li><b>Name (Beneficiary)</b>: ISBA</li>
<li><b>IBAN</b>: GB26CAFB40524000037289</li>
<li><b>Sort code</b>: 40-52-40</li>
<li><b>Account number</b>: 00037289</li>
<li><b>Receiving Bank Details</b>:
CAF Bank Limited,
25 Kings Hill Avenue,
Kings Hill,
West Malling,
Kent ME19 4JQ
</li>
</ul>
<p>Make sure to note the transaction ID, as this will be required for registration.</p>
</div>
</details>

<br>

For any other enquiries please contact the webmaster and secretary via: [webmaster@isbarch.org](mailto:webmaster@isbarch.org).

## 2. Register

Once the payment has been made, use the button below to use the Google Form to register your details:

<button onclick="window.open('https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLScSP0j1FPUZ2xN-IKjygf-IyqTi6gLB6-HQZ5wM95W4N3RfYQ/viewform?usp=sf_link')" class="button-join">Register</button>

> ⚠️ Your membership will only be considered valid once your payment has been sent!

## 3. (Students only) Send proof of student status

If you register with a student membership, please send proof of your enrollment status (e.g., photo of student ID, letter from supervisor, institutional certificate, etc.) to the [treasurer@isbarch.org](mailto:treasurer@isbarch.org), with [secretary@isbarch.org](mailto:secretary@isbarch.org) in cc.

Your membership will only be valid once the treasurer receives this proof of student status.

## 4. Confirmation

You should automatically receive an email with a confirmation number after registering (step 2). If you do not receive this email, please contact the webmaster. The membership will be valid for two years.

If you have an issues or questions, please contact the treasurer or secretary via: treasurer via: [webmaster@isbarch.org](mailto:treasurer@isbarch.org) or [secretary@isbarch.org](mailto:secretary@isbarch.org).
