---
layout: post
title: "[EVENT] 2023 - Companions, Competitors, Fellow Travelers – Biomolecular and Zooarchaeological Evidence of Human-Carnivore Interactions in the Past (EAA Session)"
categories:
- Events
  tags:
- Upcoming
---


Dear Colleagues,

We would like to invite you to contribute to our session:

*#298 **Companions, Competitors, Fellow Travelers – Biomolecular and
Zooarchaeological Evidence of Human-Carnivore Interactions in the Past*

at the *29th EAA Annual Meeting*, which will take place in Belfast,
Northern Ireland, 30 August – 2 September 2023.

You can now submit your proposals *until 9 February 2023 *at

[https://www.e-a-a.org/EAA2023/Programme](https://www.e-a-a.org/EAA2023/Programme.aspx?WebsiteKey=4c013ea5-de96-432a-85f7-b1800c2303bf&hkey=f73d6cf5-b37e-4836-ad06-2ecea6b58060&Program=3#Program)
[https://www.e-a-a.org/EAA2023/Programme.aspx?WebsiteKey=4c013ea5-de96-432a-85f7-b1800c2303bf&hkey=f73d6cf5-b37e-4836-ad06-2ecea6b58060&Program=3#Program](https://www.e-a-a.org/EAA2023/Programme.aspx?WebsiteKey=4c013ea5-de96-432a-85f7-b1800c2303bf&hkey=f73d6cf5-b37e-4836-ad06-2ecea6b58060&Program=3#Program)


You can find the description of this session’s topic below. Please feel
free to forward this email to your colleagues and anyone who may be
interested in our session.

Please do not hesitate to contact us if you have any questions.

Looking forward to hearing from you.


Best regards,

Danijela Popović ([dpopovic@cent.uw.edu.pl](mailto:dpopovic@cent.uw.edu.pl)), Chris Baumann, Maciej Krajcarz, Magdalena Krajcarz

*Session: #298*

Title: Companions, Competitors, Fellow Travelers – Biomolecular and
Zooarchaeological Evidence of Human-Carnivore Interactions in the Past

Theme: 1. Artefacts, Buildings & Ecofacts

Session format: Regular session

Keywords: archaeozoology, mammals, birds, stable isotopes, ancient DNA,
proteomics

Content:

The common history of human-carnivoran coexistence combines a
millennia-long record of mutual events and interactions: predation,
competition, commensalism, migration, domestication, and extinction. The
causes, types, and intensity of such interactions were undoubtedly the
result of the complex impact of environmental conditions, evolutionary
adaptations, the development of human culture and civilization, and human
perception. Large carnivorans were perceived as a direct physical threat to
people, simultaneously being most vulnerable to rapid extinction in
human-dominated landscapes, while the smaller species had a larger
potential to co-adapt.

A history of such past interactions can be traced using a zooarchaeological
record. But in the last decades, it has been tremendously complemented by a
wide range of molecular methods, such as direct dating, proteomics,
genetics, and stable isotopes. The results allowed an in-depth look at
carnivoran biogeography, population history, diet, and ecology. Following
the recent advances and discoveries, the session will focus on the past
relationships between humans and carnivorous mammals and birds across time
and space – from the earliest stages of humanity until modern times. The
aim is to bring together case studies from different parts of the globe and
for a variety of carnivore taxa and to open up a discussion between the
biomolecular record and interpreting archaeological evidence. The theme
intends to explore the dynamics and evolution of the relationships through
time, seen from an ecological and cultural perspective. The session is also
open to palaeobiological and conservation-related issues with the aim of
integrating archaeological and present perspectives on managing the
coexistence of carnivores and humans.

Organizers:

Danijela Popovic, Centre of New Technologies, University of Warsaw, Poland

Chris Baumann, Department of Geosciences and Geography, University of
Helsinki; Department of Geosciences, University of Tübingen, Germany

Maciej T. Krajcarz, Institute of Geological Sciences, Polish Academy of
Sciences, Poland

Magdalena Krajcarz, Department of Geosciences, University of Tübingen,
Germany; Institute of Archaeology, Nicolaus Copernicus University in Toruń,
Poland
