---
layout: post
title: "[EVENT] 2023 - Tracing the History of Mediterranean Human-Environmental Systems Using Biomolecular Methods (EAA Session)"
categories:
- Events
  tags:
- Upcoming
---

Abstract submissions are invited for the session #325 “Tracing the History
of Mediterranean Human-Environmental Systems Using Biomolecular Methods” to
be held at the 29th EAA Annual Meeting in Belfast, Northern Ireland, 30th
August – 2nd September 2023.

## Session description

The Mediterranean basin lies at the crossroads of three continents.
Throughout its rich history, it has been the stage for a succession of
political and socioeconomic organisations, the intermixing of ethnic
groups, and the emergence and spread of cultural practices intertwined with
heterogeneous environmental conditions. This makes the Mediterranean region
fertile ground for the study of complex human-environment relationships.
During the past decade, there has been a spectacular rise in the use of
biomolecular methods within Mediterranean archaeology. These have been
employed to study paleoenvironmental conditions and to reconstruct various
aspects of past human lifeways and socioeconomic activities. Multiple case
studies using isotopic, proteomics, ancient DNA, and ZooMS biomolecular
methods plus their combinations have showcased the immense research
potential that these offer to the study of Mediterranean history. The
increasing availability of sizable datasets is allowing for Big Data
meta-analyses that offer insights into diachronic and regional variations.
There is also a growing pursuit, extendable to other archaeological
contexts, for wider employment of analytical and modelling techniques that
allow for higher resolution descriptions of past phenomena (e.g.,
compound-specific isotopic analyses, Bayesian modelling, etc.). The future
of biomolecular methods in Mediterranean archaeology is assured and
important developments in our historical knowledge provided by these should
be anticipated.
In this session, we aim to offer an up-to-date overview of the use of
biomolecular methods in the study of the relationships between past
societies and the Mediterranean ecosystem. We welcome both contributions
that introduce methodological improvements employable within Mediterranean
contexts and the presentation of case studies.

## Submission instructions

Proposals for oral or poster contributions should be submitted through the
EAA website system (
[https://eaa.klinkhamergroup.com/eaa2023/sessions/contribution/?clean=1](https://eaa.klinkhamergroup.com/eaa2023/sessions/contribution/?clean=1))
indicating Session #325 “Tracing the History of Mediterranean
Human-Environmental Systems Using Biomolecular Methods” during the process.
Abstracts should be between 150 and 300 words long and the title of the
contribution be composed at maximum of 20 words. No figures or tables are
allowed in the abstract. Please also specify whether the contribution is
planned as oral (15 minutes long) or in the format of a poster. Deadline
for abstract submission: 9th of February 2023, 23:59 CET.

Additional information can be found at the meeting’s website:
[https://www.e-a-a.org/eaa2023](https://www.e-a-a.org/eaa2023)

Looking forward to meeting you in Belfast!

Session organisers,
Carlo Cocozza (MPI-GEA) [cocozza@shh.mpg.de](mailto:cocozza@shh.mpg.de)

Silvia Soncin (University of Rome “La Sapienza”)
Mary Anne Tafuri (University of Rome “La Sapienza”)
Ricardo Fernandes (MPI-GEA, Princeton University, and Masaryk University)
